Creating a Fully Managed Beam Streaming System with Flink Runner on Kubernetes - Part 2 (#29794)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2.md

---
title:  "Build a scalable, self-managed streaming infrastructure with Beam and Flink: Tackling Autoscaling Challenges - Part 2"
date:   2023-12-18 09:00:00 -0400
categories:
  - blog
authors:
  - talat
---
<!--
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

> Welcome back to Part 2 of our in-depth series on building and managing a service for Apache Beam Flink on Kubernetes. In this segment, we're taking a closer look at the hurdles we encountered while implementing autoscaling.

Reviewer: Resolving the outdated comment. Thank you for your help!

**Digging Deeper:** On closer inspection, we found that the metrics should be emitted during the 'Checkpointing' phase of the data stream processing. During this crucial step, the system takes a snapshot of the stream's state, and the metrics are typically metrics are generated for unbounded sources. Unbounded sources are sources that continuously stream data, like Kafka.

**A Potential Solution:** We believe the root of the problem lies in how the metric context is set during the checkpointing phase. A disconnect appears to prevent the Beam metrics from being properly captured in the Flink Metric system. We proposed a fix for this issue, which you can review and contribute to on our GitHub pull request: [Apache Beam PR #29793](https://github.com/apache/beam/pull/29793).

<img class="center-block"
src="/images/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2/flink-backlog-metrics.png"
alt="Apache Flink Beam Backlog Metrics">

## Overcoming challenges in checkpoint size reduction for autoscaling Beam jobs

### Understand the basics of checkpointing in Apache Flink

> In stream processing, maintaining state consistency and fault tolerance is crucial. Apache Flink achieves this through a process called *checkpointing*. It works by periodically capturing the state of a job's operators and storing it in a stable storage location, like Google Cloud Storage or AWS S3. Specifically, Flink checkpoints a job every ten seconds and allows up to one minute for this process to complete. This process is vital for ensuring that, in case of failures, the job can resume from the last checkpoint, providing exactly-once semantics and fault tolerance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In stream processing, maintaining state consistency and fault tolerance is crucial. Apache Flink achieves this through a process called *checkpointing*. Checkpointing periodically captures the state of a job's operators and stores it in a stable storage location, like Google Cloud Storage or AWS S3. Specifically, Flink checkpoints a job every ten seconds and allows up to one minute for this process to complete. This process is vital for ensuring that, in case of failures, the job can resume from the last checkpoint, providing exactly-once semantics and fault tolerance.
```

### Address the checkpoint size in large-scale jobs
Despite reducing checkpoint sizes, a 150 KB checkpoint every ten seconds can still be substantial, especially in jobs that run multiple pipelines. For instance, with 100 pipelines in a single job, this size balloons to 15 MB per 10-second interval.

### Further optimization: reduce checkpoint size with PipelineOptions
We discovered that due to a specific issue (BEAM-8577), our Flink runner was including our large `PipelineOptions` objects in every checkpoint. We solved this problem by removing unnecessary application-related options from `PipelineOptions`, further reducing the checkpoint size to a more manageable 10 KB per pipeline.

## Kafka Reader wait time: solving autoscaling challenges in Beam jobs

### Understand unaligned checkpointing

> In our system, we use unaligned checkpointing to speed up the process of checkpointing, which is essential for ensuring data consistency in distributed systems. However, when we activated the `finishBundleBeforeCheckpointing` feature, we began facing checkpoint timeout issues and delays in checkpointing steps. Apache Beam leverages Apache Flink's Legacy Source implementation for processing unbounded sources. In Flink, tasks are categorized into two types: source tasks and non-source tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our system, we use unaligned checkpointing to speed up the process of checkpointing, which is essential for ensuring data consistency in distributed systems. However, when we activated the `finishBundleBeforeCheckpointing` feature, we began facing checkpoint timeout issues and delays in checkpointing steps. Apache Beam leverages Apache Flink's legacy source implementation for processing unbounded sources. In Flink, tasks are categorized into two types: source tasks and non-source tasks.
```

- **Source tasks**: fetch data from external systems into a Flink job
- **Non-source tasks**: process the incoming data

<img class="center-block"
src="/images/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2/kafkaio-wait-reader.png"
alt="Apache Flink Task Types">

In the standard configuration, non-source tasks check for an available buffer before pulling data. If source tasks don't perform this check, they might experience checkpointing delays in writing data to the output buffer. This delay affects the efficiency of unaligned checkpoints, which are only recognized by legacy source tasks when an output buffer is available.

### Address the challenge with UnboundedSourceWrapper in Beam

To solve this problem, Apache Flink introduced a new source implementation that operates in a pull mode. In this mode, a task checks for a free buffer before fetching data, aligning with the approach of non-source tasks.

However, the legacy source, still used by Apache Beam's Flink Runner, operates in a push mode. It sends data to downstream tasks immediately. This setup might create bottlenecks when buffers are full, causing delays in detecting unaligned checkpoint barriers.

### Our solution

> Despite its deprecation, Apache Beam's Flink Runner continues using the legacy source implementation. To address its issues, we implemented our modifications and the quick workarounds based on changes suggested in [FLINK-26759](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26759). These enhancements are detailed in our [Pull Request](#). You can also find more information about unaligned checkpoint issues in the [Flink Unaligned Checkpoint](https://blog.51cto.com/u_14286418/7000028) blog post.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite its deprecation, Apache Beam's Flink Runner still uses the legacy source implementation. To address its issues, we implemented our modifications and the quick workarounds suggested in [FLINK-26759](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26759). These enhancements are detailed in our [Pull Request](#). You can also find more information about unaligned checkpoint issues in the [Flink Unaligned Checkpoint](https://blog.51cto.com/u_14286418/7000028) blog post.
```

<img class="center-block"
src="/images/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2/adaptive-timeout-kafka.png"
alt="UnboundedSourceWrapper Design">

To resolve this issue, we developed an innovative solution: an adaptive timeout strategy in `KafkaIO`. This strategy dynamically adjusts the timeout duration based on the traffic of each topic. For low-traffic topics, it shortens the timeout, preventing unnecessary delays. For high-traffic topics, it extends the timeout, providing more processing opportunities. This approach is detailed in our recent pull request.

## Unbalanced partition distribution in Beam job autoscaling

> At the heart of this system is the adaptive Scheduler, a component designed for rapid resource allocation. It intelligently adjusts the number of parallel tasks (parallelism) a job performs based on the availability of computing slots. These slots are like individual workstations, each capable of handling certain parts of the job.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the heart of this system is the adaptive scheduler, a component designed for rapid resource allocation. It intelligently adjusts the number of parallel tasks (parallelism) a job performs based on the availability of computing slots. These slots are like individual workstations, each capable of handling certain parts of the job.
```

src="/images/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2/flink-partition-assignment.png"
alt="Flink split assignment on slots">

To address this issue, we developed a custom patch for Flink's *SlotSharingSlotAllocator*, a component responsible for task distribution. This patch ensures a more balanced workload distribution across all available workers, improving efficiency and preventing bottlenecks.
With this improvement, each worker gets a fair share of tasks, leading to better resource utilization and smoother operation of our Beam Jobs.

## Drain support in Kubernetes Operator with Flink

### The challenge

In the world of data processing with Apache Flink, a common task is to manage and update data-processing jobs. These jobs could be either stateful, where they remember past data, or stateless, where they don't.

In the past, when we needed to update or delete a Flink job managed by the Kubernetes Operator, the system saved the current state of the job using a savepoint or checkpoint. However, a crucial step was missing: the system didn't stop the job from processing new data (this is what we mean by draining the job). This oversight could lead to two major issues:

> 1. **For stateful jobs:** Potential data inconsistencies, because the job might process new data that wasn't accounted for in the savepoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **For stateful jobs:** potential data inconsistencies, because the job might process new data that wasn't accounted for in the savepoint
```

> 2. **For stateless jobs:** Data duplication, because the job might reprocess data it already processed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **For stateless jobs:** data duplication, because the job might reprocess data it already processed
```

**Digging Deeper:** On closer inspection, we found that the metrics should be emitted during the 'Checkpointing' phase of the data stream processing. This is a crucial step where the system takes a snapshot of the stream's state, and it's typically where metrics are generated for 'Unbounded' sources (sources that continuously stream data, like Kafka).

**A Potential Solution:** We believe the root of the problem lies in how the metric context is set during this checkpointing phase. There seems to be a disconnect that's preventing the Beam metrics from being properly captured in the Flink Metric system. We've proposed a fix for this issue, which you can review and contribute to on our GitHub pull request here: [Apache Beam PR #29793](https://github.com/apache/beam/pull/29793).

<img class="center-block"
src="/images/blog/apache-beam-flink-and-kubernetes-part2/flink-backlog-metrics.png"
alt="Apache Flink Beam Backlog Metrics">

## Overcoming Challenges in Checkpoint Size Reduction for Autoscaling Beam Jobs

> 

Author: Done

With this improvement, each worker gets a fair share of tasks, leading to better resource utilization and smoother operation of our Beam Jobs.

## Drain Support in Kubernetes Operator with Flink

*Understanding the Challenge:*

Before we delve into the solution, let's understand the problem. In the world of data processing with Apache Flink, a common task is to manage and update data-processing jobs. These jobs could be either 'stateful' (where they remember past data) or 'stateless' (where they don't).

In the past, when we needed to update or delete a Flink job managed by the Kubernetes Operator, the system would save the current state of the job (through a 'savepoint' or 'checkpoint'). However, there was a crucial step missing: the system didn't stop the job from processing new data (this is what we mean by 'draining' the job). This oversight could lead to two major issues:
1. **For stateful jobs:** Potential data inconsistencies, as the job might process some new data that wasn't accounted for in the savepoint.
2. **For stateless jobs:** Data duplication, because the job might reprocess data it had already processed.

*The Solution: Drain Function*

> This is where the update referenced as [FLINK-32700](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32700) comes into play. It introduced a 'drain' function. Think of it as telling the job, "Finish what you're currently processing, but don't take on anything new." Here's how it works:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is where the update referenced as [FLINK-32700](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-32700) is needed. This update introduced a drain function. Think of it as telling the job, "Finish what you're currently processing, but don't take on anything new." Here's how it works:
```

> 1. **Stopping New Data:** The job stops reading new input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Stop new data:** The job stops reading new input.
```

> 2. **Marking the Source:** It marks the source with an 'infinite watermark'. This is a bit technical, but think of it as a marker that tells the system there's no more new data to process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Mark the source:** The job marks the source with an infinite watermark. Think of this watermark as a marker that tells the system that there's no more new data to process.
```

> 3. **Propagation Through the Pipeline:** This marker is then passed along through the job's processing pipeline, ensuring every part of the job knows not to expect any new data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Propagate through the pipeline:** This marker is then passed through the job's processing pipeline, ensuring that every part of the job knows not to expect any new data.
```

> This seemingly small change has a big impact. It ensures that when a job is updated or deleted, the data it processes remains consistent and accurate. This is crucial for any data-processing task, as it maintains the integrity and reliability of the data. Furthermore, in cases where the drainage fails, the job can be canceled without needing a savepoint, which adds a layer of flexibility and safety to the whole process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This seemingly small change has a big impact. It ensures that when a job is updated or deleted, the data it processes remains consistent and accurate. This is crucial for any data-processing task, because it maintains the integrity and reliability of the data. Furthermore, in cases where the drainage fails, you can cancel the job without needing a savepoint, which adds a layer of flexibility and safety to the whole process.
```

> # Conclusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

Reviewer: Resolving the outdated comment. Thank you for your help!

As we conclude Part 2 of our series on building and managing Apache Beam Flink services on Kubernetes, it's evident that the journey of implementing autoscaling has been both challenging and enlightening. The obstacles we faced, from understanding Apache Beam backlog metrics in the Flink Runner environment to addressing slow reads in high-traffic scenarios, pushed us to develop innovative solutions and deepen our understanding of streaming infrastructure.

> Our exploration into the intricacies of checkpointing, Kafka reader wait times, and unbalanced partition distribution revealed the complexities of autoscaling Beam jobs. These challenges prompted us to devise strategies like the adaptive timeout in KafkaIO and the balanced workload distribution in Flink's SlotSharingSlotAllocator. Additionally, the introduction of the drain support in Kubernetes Operator with Flink marks a significant advancement in managing stateful and stateless jobs effectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our exploration into the intricacies of checkpointing, Kafka Reader wait times, and unbalanced partition distribution revealed the complexities of autoscaling Beam jobs. These challenges prompted us to devise strategies like the adaptive timeout in `KafkaIO` and the balanced workload distribution in Flink's `SlotSharingSlotAllocator`. Additionally, the introduction of the drain support in Kubernetes Operator with Flink marks a significant advancement in managing stateful and stateless jobs effectively.
```

Reviewer: Resolving the outdated comment. Thank you for your help!

This journey has not only enhanced the robustness and efficiency of our system but has also contributed valuable insights to the broader community working with Apache Beam and Flink. We hope that our experiences and solutions will aid others facing similar challenges in their projects.

> Stay tuned for our next blog post where we will delve into the specifics of Autoscaling in Apache Beam. We'll break down the concepts, strategies, and best practices to effectively scale your Beam jobs. Thank you for following our series, and we look forward to sharing more of our journey and learnings with you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stay tuned for our next blog post, where we'll delve into the specifics of autoscaling in Apache Beam. We'll break down the concepts, strategies, and best practices to effectively scale your Beam jobs. Thank you for following our series, and we look forward to sharing more of our journey and learnings with you.
```

Reviewer: Resolving the outdated comment. Thank you for your help!

> # Acknowledgements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
```

> This is a large effort to build the new infrastructure and to migrate the large customer based applications from cloud provider managed streaming infrastructure to self-managed Flink based infrastructure at scale. Thanks the Palo Alto Networks CDL streaming team who helped to make this happen: Kishore Pola, Andrew Park, Hemant Kumar, Manan Mangal, Helen Jiang, Mandy Wang, Praveen Kumar Pasupuleti, JM Teo, Rishabh Kedia, Talat Uyarer, Naitk Dani, and David He.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a large effort to build the new infrastructure and to migrate the large customer based applications from cloud provider managed streaming infrastructure to self-managed, Flink-based infrastructure at scale. Thanks the Palo Alto Networks CDL streaming team who helped to make this happen: Kishore Pola, Andrew Park, Hemant Kumar, Manan Mangal, Helen Jiang, Mandy Wang, Praveen Kumar Pasupuleti, JM Teo, Rishabh Kedia, Talat Uyarer, Naitk Dani, and David He.
```

Reviewer: Resolving the outdated comment. Thank you for your help!
